.. time:: 130105
.. timezone:: US/Eastern
.. tag:: speech
.. tag:: patriotism
.. updated:: 2009-02-17 113130
.. author:: Patrick Henry

.. rights::

    This document is part of the public domain.

.. comment::
    Don't actually interpret this.

Give Me Liberty or Give Me Death
================================

No man thinks more highly than I do of the patriotism, as well as abilities, of
the very worthy gentlemen who have just addressed the House. But different men
often see the same subject in different lights and therefore, I hope it will not
be thought disrespectful if I entertain opinions very opposite of theirs. The
question before the House is one of awful moment to this country. For my own
part, I consider it as nothing less than a question of freedom or slavery.

I have but one lamp by which my feet are guided, and that is the lamp of
experience. I know of no way of judging but by the past. And judging by the
past, I wish to know what there has been in the conduct of the British ministry
for the last ten years to justify those hopes with which gentlemen have been
pleased to solace themselves and the House. Is it that insidious smile with
which our petition have been lately received? Trust it not, sir; it will prove a
snare to your feet. Suffer not yourselves to be betrayed by a kiss.

Sir, we have done everything that could be done to avert the storm which is now
coming on. We have petitioned; we have remonstrated, we have supplicated; we
have prostrated ourselves before the throne, and have implored its interposition
to arrest the tyrannical hands of the ministry and Parliament. Our petitions
have been slighted; our remonstrations have produced additional violence and
insult; our supplications have been disregarded; and we have been spurned, with
contempt, from the foot of the throne. In vain, after these things, may we
indulge the fond hope of peace and reconciliation? There is no longer any room
for hope. If we wish to be free – if we mean to preserve inviolate those
inestimable privileges for which we have been so long contending – if we mean
not basely to abandon the noble struggle in which we have been so long engaged,
and which we have pledged ourselves never to abandon until the glorious object
of our contest shall be obtained, we must fight! I repeat sir, we must fight! An
appeal to arms and to the God of Host is all that is left us…

They tell us we are weak. We are not weak if we make a proper use of those means
which the God of nature hath placed in our power. The millions of people armed
in the holy cause of liberty are invincible by any force which our enemy can
send against us. Besides sir, we shall not fight our battles alone. There is a
just God who presides over the destinies of nations, and who will raise up
friends to fight our battles for us. There is no retreat but in submission and
slavery. Our chains are forged. Their clanking may be heard on the plains of
Boston. The war is inevitable – and let it come. I repeat sir, let it come!

It is in vain, sir, to extenuate the matter. Gentleman may cry, Peace, Peace –
but there is no peace. The war is actually begun. The next gale that sweeps from
the north will bring to our ears the clash of resounding arms. Our brethren are
already in the field.

Why stand we here idle? What is it that gentlemen wish? What would they have? Is
life so dear or peace so sweet, as to be purchased at the price of slavery?
Forbid it, Almighty God! I know not what course others may take; but as for me,
give me liberty or give me death.
